---
title: Binary, Decimal, Hexadecimal
date: 2019-01-14
author: Connor Monahan
---

# Representation of different bases, and converting to decimal

## Decimal

We think of decimal as the base-10 system. The set of all decimal digits is $\\{0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9\\}$.

Imagine we have a number 42 (base ten). We could rewrite it as each digit multiplied by a power of ten, like so: $42 = 4 * 10^1 + 2 * 10^0$.

## Binary

The set of all binary digits is $\\{0,1\\}$.

The same idea is true for binary numbers, also known as the base-2 system. Imagine we have a number 101010 (base two). We could rewrite it as each digit multiplied by a power of two, like so: $101010_2 = 1 * 2^5 + 0 * 2^4 + 1 * 2^3 + 0 * 2^2 + 1 * 2^1 + 0 * 2^0$. If we wanted to get the decimal version of this, we could just simplify: $1 * 2^5 + 1 * 2^3 + 1 * 2^1 = 32 + 8 + 2=42$.

## Hexadecimal

The set of all hexadecimal digits is $\\{0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,A,B,C,D,E,F\\}$, where A-F have decimal values of 10-15 respectively.

The same idea is true for hexadecimal numbers, also known as the base-16 system. Imagine we have a number 2A (base sixteen). We could rewrite it as each digit multiplied by a power of sixteen, like so: $2A_{16} = 2 * 16^1 + 10 * 16^0$. If we wanted to get the decimal version of this, we could just simplify: $2 * 16^1 + 10 * 16^0 = 32 + 10 = 42$.


## Bringing it together: binary and hexadecimal to decimal

Above, we have seen that finding the value of a binary or hexadecimal number in decimal simply requires writing out each digit multiplied by its place value and then simplifying.

# Converting decimal to binary or hexadecimal by repeated division

A technique for converting to either binary or hexadecimal is to take the number in decimal and successively divide by either 2 or 16 (depending on the target base), using the remainders to construct the resultant number. Say we want to convert 42 to binary. We would start to divide by 2:

<!-- thanks https://stackoverflow.com/questions/22867785 --->
$$
\require{enclose}
\begin{array}{rll}
    21\\\\[-3pt]
   2 \enclose{longdiv}{42}\kern-.2ex \\\\[-3pt]
      \underline{42}  \\\\[-3pt]
      0 \\\\[-3pt]
  \end{array}
$$

Now, we know that the rightmost digit of the resulting binary number is 0, as that is the remainder of the division. We continue by dividing the previous quotient again:

$$
\require{enclose}
\begin{array}{rll}
    10\\\\[-3pt]
   2 \enclose{longdiv}{21}\kern-.2ex \\\\[-3pt]
      \underline{20}  \\\\[-3pt]
      1 \\\\[-3pt]
  \end{array}
$$

The remainder is 1, so the next digit to the left is a 1. Continue dividing until the quotient is 0 (the intermediate three divisions are left as an exercise for the reader):

$$
\require{enclose}
\begin{array}{rll}
    0\\\\[-3pt]
   2 \enclose{longdiv}{1}\kern-.2ex \\\\[-3pt]
      \underline{0}  \\\\[-3pt]
      1 \\\\[-3pt]
  \end{array}
$$

The final remainder is 1, so the leftmost digit of the resulting binary number is 1. Writing all the results next to each other, we get a result of 101010.

The same technique works for converting to hexadecimal (simply divide by 16 repeatedly instead of 2). This technique generalizes to other bases as well.

<script>
MathJax = {
  tex: {
    inlineMath: [['$', '$'], ['\\(', '\\)']]
  }
};
</script>
<script id="MathJax-script" async
  src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mathjax@3/es5/tex-chtml.js">
</script>
